Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today we are
going to be talking about the Nobel Prize.
For over 100 years, prizes have been
awarded each year to men and women for
their contributions to the fields of
physics, chemistry, medicine, literature
and perhaps most famously, peace.
The man behind the prize is Alfred
Nobel, and in today’s episode, we are
going to hear his fantastic story.
OK then, let’s get right into it and talk
about Alfred Nobel and the Nobel Prize.
What would someone write
about your life when you die?
If you had some magical power to see
into the future, to after you had taken
your last breath, and you were the
sort of person about whom obituaries
might be written, what would it say?
Would it say that you'd lived a good,
honest life, been a good parent,
brother, sister, son, or daughter?
That you had made the world a better
place, however that might have been?
For one man in 1888, so the perhaps
apocryphal legend goes, this was
not a fantasy, but a reality.
In 1888, the Swedish businessman
and inventor, Ludvig Nobel, died.
News of his death was sent by
telegram, but one French newspaper
seemed to have got a bit mixed up.
Instead of writing the obituary for
the recently deceased Ludvig Nobel, it
published the obituary of his very much
still-breathing younger brother, Alfred.
It was not a glowing report on Alfred
Nobel’s life; instead, it described him
as “the merchant of death,” a man who
“became rich by finding ways to kill
more people faster than ever before.”
Don’t worry, we’ll come to why they
might have called him this in a minute.
Alfred Nobel read his obituary,
presumably pinched himself to confirm
that he wasn’t, in fact, dead, and must
have decided that he didn’t like the
idea of being remembered in this way.
He couldn’t change his past, but he could
change his future, and importantly, how
he would be remembered after his death.
So, in his last will and testament, he
declared that his considerable fortune
would go towards the establishment of
a prize for outstanding achievements
in five fields: physics, chemistry,
medicine, literature, and peace.
Now, Ludvig Nobel did die in 1888,
and his brother Alfred did leave
his fortune for the establishment of
the Nobel Prize, but there are some
questions about the truthfulness
of this obituary mix-up story.
It is often reported, but it
doesn’t appear on the official
Nobel Prize website and is dismissed
as a myth by many historians.
And like many legends, this one is
no doubt retold because it sounds
like it could be true: an elderly man
sees how he will be remembered and
wants to do something to change it.
As to whether it is true, I will leave
you to come to your own conclusions, but
to understand why this then 54-year-old
Swedish businessman might have found
himself described as a “merchant of
death”, and why he might have decided
he wanted to do something about it,
we need to go right back to the start.
He was born in 1833 in Stockholm, Sweden.
He came from a middle-class
family, but one that found
itself perpetually short on cash.
His father, Immanuel Nobel,
was an inventor and engineer.
A clever man, clearly, and
one full of ideas, but not
always the best businessman.
Like many inventors and engineers,
he had grand dreams and a habit
of pursuing ambitious projects
that didn’t always work out.
As a result, the family struggled
financially in Alfred’s early years.
When he was just five years old, his
father was forced to declare bankruptcy.
The family had to leave their comfortable
home in Stockholm and start anew.
His father, however, didn’t give up.
He moved to Russia to seek
new opportunities, leaving
his family behind in Sweden.
It was a bold move, but it paid off.
In St. Petersburg, he managed to convince
the Russian military to invest in his
inventions, particularly underwater
mines and underwater explosives.
Before long, he was running a
successful armaments factory and
had made enough money to bring
the whole family over to join him.
So Alfred Nobel, at the age
of nine, moved to Russia.
There, he and his brothers were given a
private education that was far better than
what they would have received in Sweden.
They studied science,
literature, and languages.
And the young Alfred turned
out to be a gifted student.
By the time he was a teenager, he could
speak five languages fluently: Swedish,
Russian, French, English and German.
He had a particular interest in
literature and poetry, which led to
tensions with his father, who wanted
his sons to follow in his footsteps and
become engineers, not poets or writers.
Eventually, the young boy was sent
abroad to complete his education.
He travelled around Europe and studied
chemistry in Paris, where he was taught by
some of the leading scientists of the day.
And it was in Paris that he met a man
who would change the course of his life:
the Italian chemist Ascanio Sobrero.
Sobrero had recently discovered a highly
explosive substance called nitroglycerin.
It was far more powerful than gunpowder,
but it was also extremely unstable.
For gunpowder to explode, you need
some kind of spark or flame; it
won’t just explode on its own.
Nitroglycerin was far less predictable;
even the smallest movement or change in
temperature could cause it to explode.
Sobrero saw its power, but
believed it was too dangerous and
unstable to have any practical use.
Alfred Nobel disagreed.
He became fascinated with the idea of
taming nitroglycerin, of finding a way to
make it stable enough for practical use.
And this wasn’t, by the way,
because he was fascinated by
weapons or he had some great desire
to develop military technology.
His intended use for it, and where he
thought the biggest commercial opportunity
lay, was in construction or mining.
This was the second half of the 19th
century; roads and railways were
being laid across Europe and North
America, and mines were being dug.
You could hire hundreds of people to
dig a tunnel through a mountain with
pickaxes and shovels…or you could
just blow it up with explosives.
It would be cheaper, quicker and–perhaps
unexpectedly given we’re talking
about blowing things up–even safer.
And it’s this obsession with
explosives that would come to
define the next chapter of his life.
Nobel returned to Sweden and
threw himself into experiments.
He set up a laboratory in the back
of his father’s factory, and spent
countless hours mixing chemicals, testing
compounds, and trying to work out how
to make nitroglycerin safer to handle.
The potential was enormous,
but so was the danger.
As you might imagine, there were frequent
accidents: some small, others deadly.
In 1864, a massive explosion at the
factory killed five people, including
Alfred’s younger brother Emil.
It was a devastating blow, personally,
of course, but also professionally.
There were calls for his
experiments to be shut down.
Local authorities banned the production
of nitroglycerin within the city limits,
and clearly, nobody wanted to live
next to the Nobel explosives factory.
But Nobel didn’t stop.
Instead, he moved the work onto a
barge–a boat–anchored in the middle
of a lake, far from anyone who might
be harmed if something went wrong.
And then, after years of
experimentation, he made a breakthrough.
He discovered that if you mixed
nitroglycerin with a kind of
absorbent clay called kieselguhr,
it became far more stable.
You could shape it into sticks, transport
it without fear of accidental explosion,
and control when and how it detonated.
He decided to name this new
invention after the Greek
word dynamis, meaning “power.”
It was, as you might
have guessed, “dynamite”.
It was a revolution.
Dynamite was cheaper, safer,
and more effective than
anything that had come before.
Within a few years, Nobel had patented
it across Europe and North America.
It was used to blast tunnels
through mountains, build railways,
dig mines, and clear canals.
Bridges, dams, and entire cities were
constructed with the help of dynamite.
But, as became quickly apparent,
dynamite is also pretty handy
for non-peaceful purposes.
Although Nobel had originally
intended it for industrial use, people
quickly saw its military potential.
It was more powerful than anything they
had worked with before, and much easier
to transport than older explosives.
Armies began to use it for demolition,
sabotage, and battlefield engineering.
It also found its way into
the hands of anarchists and
revolutionaries, who used it in
political assassinations and bombings.
And dynamite wasn’t the end of it.
In the 1880s, Nobel developed
another explosive compound called
ballistite, which was one of
the first smokeless gunpowders.
It was adopted by several European
militaries and used in modern ammunition.
This invention brought him even closer
to the world of warfare and reinforced
the image of him not just as an
inventor but as an arms manufacturer.
This left him a conflicted man.
Yes, his inventions had
made him very wealthy.
He established factories and
laboratories in over twenty countries.
He held more than 350
patents in his lifetime.
He was a chemist, an engineer, a
businessman, and a global industrialist.
But his creations could and
were being used to kill.
He was also, increasingly, a man alone.
He never married.
He moved frequently, leading the
French writer Victor Hugo to describe
him as “Europe’s richest vagabond”.
He had no permanent home, and would
typically live in hotels or alone in large
houses, surrounded by books and papers.
He wasn’t, however, completely
without friends or companionship.
In the 1870s, he had placed an advert in
a Viennese newspaper for a housekeeper.
It read, “Wealthy, highly educated,
elderly gentleman seeks lady of
mature age, versed in languages, as
secretary and supervisor of household.”
One of the applicants was a
woman called Bertha Kinsky.
She was an Austrian aristocrat down on her
luck, well-read, and highly intelligent.
Nobel hired her, but after
only a couple of years, she
left to marry a former lover.
That might have been the end of the
story, but the two kept in touch.
They continued to write
to each other for decades.
Bertha Kinsky—who became Bertha
von Suttner—went on to become a
leading figure in the peace movement.
Her 1889 novel Lay Down Your Arms!
became an international bestseller
and helped spark a new wave of
pacifist activism across Europe.
In their letters, they exchanged
a healthy debate over the moral
implications of Nobel’s inventions.
This was clearly something that he
was thinking deeply about, but his
conclusion, at least in one letter, was
that dynamite could act as a vehicle for
peace, but just in an unexpected way.
To quote one letter directly: “Perhaps
my factories will put an end to war
sooner than your congresses: on the
day that two army corps can mutually
annihilate each other in a second, all
civilised nations will surely recoil
with horror and disband their troops.”
End quote.
Now, as to whether Nobel truly believed
that or it was his way of legitimising his
inventions and making himself feel better,
I will let you be the judge of that.
What is not up for debate is that when
Nobel was drafting his will and deciding
how best to use his considerable fortune,
alongside the prizes for the sciences
and medicine, he included an award for
“the person who shall have done the most
or the best work for fraternity between
nations, for the abolition or reduction
of standing armies and for the holding
and promotion of peace congresses.”
That became the Nobel Peace Prize.
And when Alfred Nobel died, alone and
without any direct heirs, in 1896 in
Sanremo, in Italy, his fortune went to
the establishment of this collection of
five prizes: physics, chemistry, medicine,
literature and, of course, peace.
The sixth prize, by the way,
the one in economics, was only
added much later, in 1968.
This fortune, by the way,
was vast, equivalent to $300
million in today’s money.
It has since been well invested, and the
Nobel Foundation now has assets of around
$700 million, more than enough to continue
dishing out prizes until the end of time.
Now, interestingly enough, when his dying
wish was first revealed, there were not
rounds of applause and claps of joy.
The first reaction was…confusion.
He hadn’t told anyone about
this wish, and–after having had
numerous bad experiences with
lawyers in his business career–he
had drafted the will without one.
As such, there were a bunch of questions
to be resolved, and the organisations
that he had named to administer the
prize had been given no idea of the plan.
His extended family fought the will, too.
After all, a huge fortune was at
stake, and he had pledged it all
to this then theoretical prize.
It took a while, but after five years and
endless back-and-forth negotiations, the
Nobel Prize Foundation was established.
Since the first prizes were awarded
in 1901, they have been awarded
more than 600 times to over 1,000
individuals and organisations.
Some are names you’ll recognise instantly.
Marie Curie, the first woman to win
a Nobel Prize, and indeed the only
person to win one in two different
sciences: physics and chemistry.
Martin Luther King Jr., for
his non-violent fight for civil
rights in the United States.
Malala Yousafzai, the youngest-ever
laureate, who stood up for the rights
of girls to receive an education.
Nelson Mandela.
Albert Einstein.
Ernest Hemingway.
Mother Teresa.
It is, in many ways, a
roll-call of human achievement.
A celebration of the
best that people can do.
But not all laureates
are remembered so fondly.
Some choices, with the benefit of
hindsight, are harder to justify.
In 1949, the Portuguese neurologist
António Egas Moniz was awarded the
Nobel Prize in Medicine for developing
the prefrontal lobotomy — a procedure
now widely condemned as brutal,
ineffective, and deeply damaging.
Thousands of patients were lobotomised
across Europe and North America,
often without proper consent, and
often with disastrous consequences.
The prize, however,
has never been revoked.
And then there’s the Peace
Prize, which is probably the most
politically charged of them all.
It has been awarded to plenty of people
almost universally recognised and agreed
upon for their contributions: people
like Mother Teresa and Nelson Mandela.
But in 1973, it was awarded to Henry
Kissinger and Lê Đức Thọ for their
efforts to end the war in Vietnam.
Lê Đức Thọ declined the prize,
citing the ongoing conflict.
Kissinger, on the other hand, accepted
it, despite the fact that the bombing
of Cambodia and Laos continued
under his watch, and “Kissinger” and
“peace” were not two words that many
people put in the same sentence.
The choice was so controversial
that two members of the Nobel
committee resigned in protest.
So, to wrap things up, like anything,
the Nobel Prize is not perfect,
and not without its contradictions.
It has been awarded to people now
criticised as cruel and inhumane.
It has been accused of being
used to make political points.
It is a prize made possible by dynamite.
But for all its flaws, the Nobel Prize
still holds enormous symbolic power.
It can shine a light on discoveries no one
had heard of, lift unknown writers out of
obscurity, or bring global attention to a
political cause that had gone unnoticed.
It’s a prize that rewards ideas:
ideas that push humanity forward,
even if progress itself is
messy, uneven, and imperfect.
And perhaps that’s what
Alfred Nobel had hoped for.
Not to erase the past, but
to influence the future.
Not to rewrite his life, but to
shape how it might be remembered.
And more than a century later, his name is
still spoken every year in connection with
some of the most important breakthroughs
in science, literature, and peace.
And at least in my book, that isn’t
such a bad way to be remembered.
OK, then, that is it for today's episode
on Alfred Nobel and the Nobel Prize.
I hope it's been an interesting one
and that you've learnt something new.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought of this episode.
Did you know this story
about the Nobel Prize?
Is there someone you think is
deserving of it who hasn’t won,
or someone undeserving who has?
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.